README.md, before:

# Software linking

This small repository highlights some differences between dynamic and static
linking.

The main difference between the two is that with dynamic linking a user has the
option to dynamically choose which library to use at the time of execution.
For the static linking the choice of library is determined at compile time.

In this repository there are several directories.

- `fortran`  
  Contains a fortran source code which highlights the differences of linking
  with compiled code.
- `package`  
  contains code for scripting languages. In particular a playground package
  and some examples of how to run code.
- `python`  
  Contains a python source code which is a scripting language. Here there is *per see*
  not any *linking* taking place.

## Dynamic or Static?

All programs you are using on your computer have likely been compiled at some point in
time, and they are generally using *dynamic*/*shared* linking.

The difference between static and dynamic linking can be explained with an analogy of how
person **A** shares a document to person **B**.

- Static  
  Person **A** will send the document to person **B** (e.g. as an attachment in emails)

- Dynamic  
  Person **A** will send a link to the document to person **B** (e.g. person **B** does not *have* the
  document). E.g. SharePoint, or Google Docs.

The difference in this case is obvious. When sharing a link, person **A** has the possibility
of updating the document, without having to resend it to person **B**. Additionally there
is no duplication of data. The document only lives *one place*.
However, if person **A** accidentally deletes the document, then it will be lost, and the context
in which the document was used will be lost.  
With static linking one ensures that person **B** has complete knowledge at the time
of receiving the document. This at the cost of having to request a new document if it
changes, and at the cost of duplicating data.

This analogy is directly transferable to the software eco-system.



## Accessing the DTU HPC infrastructure

The examples and playground will be done on the DTU HPC infrastructure.

All DTU employees have access to our HPC infrastructure.

Please go to [https://thinlinc.gbar.dtu.dk](https://thinlinc.gbar.dtu.dk/) and login
using your regular DTU credentials.

There, you'll have access to a Linux distribution, and will have access to all the
software all employees and students have access to.


## Interesting quotes from GPL

> The “Corresponding Source” for a work in object code form means all the source code
> needed to generate, install, and (for an executable work) run the object code and to
> modify the work, including scripts to control those activities. However, it does not
> include the work's System Libraries, or general-purpose tools or generally available
> free programs which are used unmodified in performing those activities but which are not
> part of the work. For example, Corresponding Source includes interface definition files
> associated with source files for the work, and the source code for shared libraries and
> dynamically linked subprograms that the work is specifically designed to require, such
> as by intimate data communication or control flow between those subprograms and other
> parts of the work.

The key sentence (for me) is:

> ... and the source code for shared libraries and dynamically linked subprograms that the
> work is specifically designed to require ...

To me, this seems to give me room to say that I don't require a specific subprogram.
Only one that defines the same API.

Commit message:

finalized details
Signed-off-by: Nick Papior <nickpapior@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

# Software linking

This small repository highlights some differences between dynamic and static
linking.

The main difference between the two is that with dynamic linking a user has the
option to dynamically choose which library to use at the time of execution.
For the static linking the choice of library is determined at compile time.

In this repository there are several directories.

- `fortran`  
  Contains a fortran source code which highlights the differences of linking
  with compiled code.
- `package`  
  contains code for scripting languages. In particular a playground package
  and some examples of how to run code.
- `python`  
  Contains a python source code which is a scripting language. Here there is *per see*
  not any *linking* taking place.

## Dynamic or Static?

All programs you are using on your computer have likely been compiled at some point in
time, and they are generally using *dynamic*/*shared* linking.

The difference between static and dynamic linking can be explained with an analogy of how
person **A** shares a document to person **B**.

- Static  
  Person **A** will send the document to person **B** (e.g. as an attachment by email).

- Dynamic  
  Person **A** will send a link to the document to person **B** (e.g. person **B** does not *have* the
  document). For example SharePoint or Google Docs.

The difference in this case is obvious. When sharing a link, person **A** has the possibility
of updating the document, without having to resend it to person **B**. Additionally there
is no duplication of data. The document only lives *one place*.
However, if person **A** accidentally deletes the document, then it will be lost, and the context
in which the document was used will be lost.  
With static linking one ensures that person **B** has complete knowledge at the time
of receiving the document. This at the cost of having to request a new document if it
changes, and at the cost of duplicating data.

This analogy is directly transferable to the software eco-system.



## Accessing the DTU HPC infrastructure

The examples and playground will be done on the DTU HPC infrastructure.

All DTU employees have access to our HPC infrastructure.

Please go to [https://thinlinc.gbar.dtu.dk](https://thinlinc.gbar.dtu.dk/) and login
using your regular DTU credentials.

There, you'll have access to a Linux distribution, and will have access to all the
software all employees and students have access to.


## Getting this source repository

Open up a terminal and execute the following:
```shell
git clone https://github.com/dtudk/software-linking.git
```


## License

 software-linking © 2025 by Nick Papior, Technical University of Denmark is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0
